[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §1]
We have given to thee, Adam, no fixed seat, no form of thy very own, no gift peculiarly thine, that thou mayest feel as thine own, have as thine own, possess as thine own whatever seat, whatever form, whatever gifts thou shalt desire. The nature of all other beings is limited and constrained within laws prescribed by Us. Thou, constrained by no limits, in accordance with thine own free will, in whose hand We have placed thee, shalt ordain for thyself the limits of thy nature.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §2]
Thou mayest grow downward into the lower natures which are brutes. Thou mayest grow upward from thy soul's reason into the higher natures which are divine. We have made thee neither of heaven nor of earth, neither mortal nor immortal, so that with freedom of choice and with honor, as though the maker and molder of thyself, thou mayest fashion thyself in whatever shape thou shalt prefer.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §3]
This is the miracle of man, that he is the intermediary between creatures, familiar with the gods above him and lord of the beings beneath him, the interpreter of nature by the sharpness of his senses, by the inquiry of his reason, and by the light of his intelligence. He is the bond and union of the world, the marriage-song of the universe.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §4]
To man alone is given the privilege of self-transformation. The angels are fixed in their perfection, the beasts in their limitations. But man stands at the center, capable of ascending to the divine through contemplation and virtue, or descending to the bestial through neglect of his higher nature.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §5]
Let us despise earthly things and aspire to heavenly things. Let us disdain whatever is of this world and hasten to that court beyond the world, nearest to the most exalted Godhead. There, as the sacred mysteries relate, the Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones occupy the first places.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §6]
Unable to rival their angelic dignity in its fullness, let us at least emulate their ardor. If we will it, we shall be in nothing inferior to them. The Seraph burns with the fire of charity; the Cherub shines with the splendor of intelligence; the Throne stands in steadfastness of judgment. Let us pursue these qualities through philosophy, through moral discipline, through contemplation.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §7]
Philosophy has promised me peace, yet I find only conflict—not the conflict of battle, but the conflict of ideas contending for truth. From the Platonists I learn the dignity of the soul; from the Aristotelians, the order of nature; from the Stoics, virtue and constancy. Each school offers part of the truth, and the wise man gathers wisdom wherever it may be found.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §8]
Let us not confine ourselves to one school of philosophy, but let us draw upon all the springs of wisdom. Truth is not the monopoly of any single tradition. The ancient theologians of the Hebrews, the mystics of Egypt, the sages of Persia, the philosophers of Greece—all have glimpsed aspects of the one eternal truth.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §9]
Man's dignity lies not in what he is, but in what he may become. Other creatures fulfill their nature by instinct; man must create his own nature through choice. This freedom is terrible and glorious—terrible because we may choose wrongly, glorious because we may choose rightly and thereby participate in the divine.

[Pico, Oration on the Dignity of Man, §10]
If we consecrate ourselves to moral philosophy, we shall purge the soul of its excesses and moderate its passions. If we dispel the darkness of reason by dialectic, we shall exercise the mind in truth. If we cultivate natural philosophy, we shall understand the harmony of creation. And if we rise to theology, we shall commune with God Himself through contemplation of divine things.
